blog post about prospero challenge (#159)
pypy/pypy.org: posts/2025/04/prospero-in-rpython.md

min(x, min(x, y)) =>  min(x, y)  52.87%
max(x, x) => x                   16.40%
max(x, max(x, y)) => max(x, y)    4.23%
```

In the end it turned out that having these extra optimization rules made the
total runtime of the system go up. Checking for the rewrites isn't free, and
since they apply so rarely they don't pay for their own cost in terms of
improved performance.

There are some further rules that I tried that never fired at all:

```
a * 0 => 0
a * 1 => a
a * a => a ** 2
a * -1 => -a
a + 0 => a
a - 0 => a
x - x => 0
abs(known positive number x) => x
abs(known negative number x) => -x
abs(-x) => abs(x)
(-x) ** 2 => x ** 2
```

This investigation is clearly way too focused on a single program and should be
re-done with a larger set of example inputs, if this were an actually serious
implementation.

## Demanded Information Optimization

TODO Max: I am having a hard time understanding the demanded bits thing from your localized-to-prospero explanation. I think some of it is that I am wondering "what about the other uses of operation A that operation B only needs one bit from" and part of it is that the sign operations are implicit here

> LLVM has an information called 'demanded bits'. It is a backwards analysis that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LLVM has an static analysis pass called 'demanded bits'. It is a backwards analysis that
```

allows you to determine which bits of a value are actually used in the final
result. This information can then be used in peephole optimizations. For
example, if you have an expression that computes a value, but only the last
byte of that value is used in the final result, you can optimize the expression
to only compute the last byte.

Here's an example. Let's say we first byte-swap a 64-bit int, and then mask off the last byte:

```c
uint64_t byteswap_then_mask(uint64_t a) {
    return byteswap(a) & 0xff;
}
```

In this case, the "demanded bits" of the `byteswap(a)` expression are
`0b0...011111111`, which inversely means that we don't care about the upper 56
bits. Therefore the whole expression can be optimized to `a >> 56`.

> For Fidget, we can observe that for the resulting pixel values, the value of

Reviewer: I think this is the first time Fidget is mentioned? It should be defined...

Author: done, I replaced it with "For the Prospero challenge" (fidget is mentioned in the second paragraph, but that was kind of the wrong term anyway)

                return res
            floatvalues[op] = res
        return self.floatvalues[num_ops - 1]
```

I implemented this in the RPython
version, but didn't end up porting it to C, because it interferes with SIMD.

## Dead code elimination

Matt performs dead code elimination in his implementation by doing a single
backwards pass over the program. This is a very simple and effective
optimization, and I implemented it in my implementation as well. The dead code
elimination pass is very simple: It starts by marking the result operation as
used. Then it goes backwards over the program. If the current operation is
used, its arguments are marked as used as well. Afterwards, all the operations
that are not marked as used are removed from the program. The PyPy JIT actually
performs dead code elimination on traces in exactly the same way (and I don't
think we ever explained how this works on the blog), so I thought it was worth
mentioning.

Matt also performs register allocation as part of the backwards pass, but I
didn't implement it because I wasn't too interested in that aspect.

## Random testing of the optimizer

> To make sure I didn't break anything in the optimizer, I implemented a random

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make sure I didn't break anything in the optimizer, I implemented a
```

an `IFDEF`.

It's super fun to watch the random program generator produce random images, here are a few:

<iframe width="560" height="560" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/VqU5n3zzOjc" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Performance

Some very rough performance results on my laptop (an AMD Ryzen 7 PRO 7840U with
32 GiB RAM running Ubuntu 24.04), comparing the RPython version, the C version
(with and without demanded info), and Fidget (in `vm` mode, its JIT made things
worse for me), both for 1024x1024 and 4096x4096 images:

| Implementation       | 1024x1024 | 4096x4096 |
|----------------------|-----------|-----------|
| RPython              | 26.8ms    | 75.0ms    |
| C (no demanded info) | 24.5ms    | 45.0ms    |
| C (demanded info)    | 18.0ms    | 37.0ms    |
| Fidget               | 10.8ms    | 57.8ms    |

The demanded info seem to help quite a bit, which was nice to see.

## Conclusion

That's it! I had lots of fun with the challenge and have a whole bunch of other

> ideas I want to try out, but I should actually go back to working on my actual
> projects now ;-).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ideas I want to try out, thanks Matt for this interesting puzzle.
```
